# Link to VCS

Each distribution uploaded to CPAN includes some meta-data. This meta-data can contain a link to the public version control system (VCS) of the project. (e.g. on GitHub, GitLab, or some other platform.

Including this link in the meta-data of the project will help potential contributors to find the repository and to contribute to the project.

If the repository field is included in the distribution then [MetaCPAN](https://metacpan.org/) will display in in the side-bar of the project with a title **Repository**.

This meta-data is included in the `META.json` file which is part of the zip-file uploaded to CPAN.

The `META.json` file is generated by the package management system (Makefile.PL, Build.PL, or Dist::Zilla) when the distribution is released.


1. Find a distribution that does not have this link.
    * The [CPAN Digger](https://cpan-digger.perlmaven.com/recent) has a list of recently uploaded distributions. There is a column called "VCS". If it has "Add repo" then the repository information is missing.
2. Try to locate the actual repository.
    * Check other projects of the cpan author. If one of those has the repository link" then you might find the repository of this project next to the other one.
    * Search the name of the project or the name of the author on GitHub and on GitLab.
    * Send an email to the author asking if the project has a public VCS.
3. Clone the project to your disk.
4. Run the commands to that are needed to release the project. Observe the `META.json` file still missing the data.
5. Create a branch.
6. Edit `Makefile.PL`, `Build.PL`, `dist.ini` as explained [here](https://perlmaven.com/how-to-add-link-to-version-control-system-of-a-cpan-distributions)
7. Run the project release commands again. Observe the `META.json` file having the correct data.
8. Commit the changes.
9. On GitHub (or GitLab) create a fork.
10. Locally map the fork to be another `remote` of the project.
11. Push out the changes to the forked remote.
11. Go to GitHub (or GitLab) and send a Pull-Request (Merge-Request).

